---
layout: post
title:  Currying - Spice Things Up
categories: functional programming
---

This is one of my favorites. As we already discussed in the [previous blog post]({% post_url 2016-04-16-intro-to-functional-programming %}), in functional programming we can create and pass around functions just as any other object.

**The same way a function can return a value such as [42][42]{:target="_blank"}, it can also return another function as the result.**

> Awesome! Wait, how is this useful?

In functional programming it is all about composing simple functions together to do one complex task.

## The Example

Let's say that we are building a spell checker, and we need a function that will take a list of words, and then return a list of misspelled words.

### First Solution

We build one function that takes the dictionary, and the list of words, and returns the list misspelled of words.

That sounds great, but there are some problems with this approach:

- It is *way too specific*, it can do only one thing. And it is very hard to think of a scenario where we might reuse it.
- In order to test it, you need both the dictionary and a list of words, and that is too much.

### Improved Solution

We can split this function into two simpler functions, that are both more generic and more easily testable.

First we create a function that takes a list of some elements and filters out those that we don't want:

    filter(list, fn) // Returns a list of x, where fn(x) == true

Obviously we can use this `filter` function for many things, not just for the dictionary.

Secondly let's create a function that takes one word and a dictionary and then returns true or false:

    misspelled(dictionary, word) // Returns true or false

Now let's see how we can combine these two functions to create what we need for our spell checker.

We can't just do this:

    filter(words, misspelled)

Because `filter` requires a function that takes only **one** argument.

    misspelled(dictionary):
      return function(word) {
        return misspelled(dictionary, word)
      }

[42]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phrases_from_The_Hitchhiker%27s_Guide_to_the_Galaxy#Answer_to_the_Ultimate_Question_of_Life.2C_the_Universe.2C_and_Everything_.2842.29